---
title: The Physics Behind Pigeon Navigation
tags: [Physics Behind, Magnetoreception, BioPhysics]
style: fill
color: light
comments: true
description: The flying nonmechanical heros of World War I.
mathjax: true
---
<br>
## Foreword
I saw a video online of a carrier pigeon (formally called a Homing Pigeon) and I was curious as to how they work. Here, I'll dive into the physics behind their impeccable navigation skills, frequently referencing magnetic fields as written about in Purcell & Morin's _Electricity and Magnetism_ textbook we used in our PHYS406 class (taught by probably the best professor I've ever had). I'll begin by discussing magnetic fields, then magnetoreception, ending with how pigeons harness the aforementioned phenomena.

Secondly, there's a wide array of organisms which can do this. The domestic pigeon, which is the best known & studied case of this phenomena, was selectively bred and can be traced back to the wild dove.  

## The Magnetic Force & Field
Imagine you have two magnets: We know that depending on the polarity it either attracts or repels the other magnet. Simply put: electrons, because they will always have charge and a magnetic dipole moment (side note, a moment is when something feels torque and then does something). The force that causes this reaction exists as a fundamental truth, it cannot be disputed and must be accepted. Specific to ferromagnetism, to prove this we can do a thought experiment: cut a magnet in half. What is the result? Two smaller magnets. Cutting those two smaller magnets in half respectively, we now have 4 magnets. Cutting those 4 in half respectively, we have 8 magnets. Repeating this process until reaching a molecular level, we have a single _Fe_ atom (lemma: magnets come in pairs! No matter how much you split it, there will always exist a north & south pole). We're now at a quantum level dealing with a single _Fe_ atom, meaning, quantum properties are at the source of this discussion; specifically $$\bf{spin}$$ and  $$\textbf{exchange}$$ $$\bf{coupling}$$. Taking it one step deeper to the electron level, that's where the magic is. The quantum behavior of an electron shows it spins in either two states: spin up or spin down. The spin orientation of the electron can determine the magnetic moment.

The iron atom has two unpaired electrons. Through a phenomena called _exchange interaction_ it's observed that atoms with unpaired electrons, whether spins parallel or anti-parallel to one another, if they're in the same orbit they'll have an energy clash - see, electrons are fermions, meaning that there cannot be two electrons in the same quantum state - so they'll move apart and their spins will align. For an iron atom, the magnetization occurs due to the unpaired electrons aligning their spin with the neighboring atoms. Now, zooming out, a large collection of these atoms forms the bar or fridge magnet we're all familiar with. The magnetizations of minerals is dependent on the intrinsic magnetic moments of electrons spinnnig on their axis or the motion of the electrons in their orbits about the atomic nuclei.  

The field is a way of representing this force spatially through vectors. Vectors have direction and magnitude, so a large vector pointing out of the north end would indicate a large magnetic force at that point, whereas a few cm away there would be a tiny arrow, indicating a weak magnetic force at that point. It would look like this:  
{% include elements/figure.html image="https://cdn.kastatic.org/ka-perseus-images/4d7044685fee240f1bd32a5a73488f12ffc8df54.png" caption="Magnetic field lines represented via iron filings in the presence of a bar magnet" %}

Observe that the iron filings are concentrated near the bar magnet but are weaker and smaller a few cm away. The magnetic field lines point from north to south. That's the magnetic field visualized. Keep in mind, this exists on the earth as well! We're in the constant presence of a magnetic field.
{% include elements/figure.html image="https://cdn.comsol.com/wordpress/2018/05/magnetic-field-lines-around-earth.png" caption="Earth's Magnetic Field" %}
What's interesting is that the Earth's field lines point from south to north. That's actually because the Earths magnetic north is different from the geographic north. The direction is subject to how we've defined it throughout time.

### Brief Overview of Earth's Magnetic Field
The Earth is tilted 11.3 degrees from the central spin axis. That's an experimentally observed truth but the actual origins of the Earth's magnetic field is unknown. The leading explanation is the Geodynamo theory, operating under some sound assumptions. There exists highly conductive metallic iron liquid in the core, whose rapid motion leads to an internal electric field, via the Coriolis effect. The effect is observed when looking at objects that are deflected while traveling. Due to the Earth's rotation, if an object in the northern hemisphere is thrown, it will appear to deflect towards the right, whereas in the southern hemisphere it will deflect to the left. In the case of the Earth's core, the liquid iron is deflected outward creating an 'Amperian ring' - _in short, the core field is caused by a rapid and complex flow of highly conductive metallic iron in the outer core, spinning due to the earths rotation, being pushed to the end forming an Amperian loop._

Since moving currents induce a changing magnetic field, this is thought to be the origin of the Earth's magnetic field and subsequently the magnetization of all the materials as we know it. The magnetic induction force can actually be calculated precisely through the Lorentz Force Law:

$$\bf{\overrightarrow{F}}=q_0(\bf{\overrightarrow{E} + v}\;\;\text{x}\;\;\bf{\overrightarrow{B}})$$

where $$\bf{v}$$ is the velocity of the test charge $$q_0$$, $$\bf{B}$$ is the magnetic field vector, $$\bf{E}$$ is the electric field vector, and $$q_0$$ is the test charge. That can be thought of as one of the charges in the hot liquid iron spinning in the induced electric & magnetic fields.

The origin of the Lorentz force law is interesting... putting special relativity on pause for now, a purely theoretical & imaginative approach, a 'gedankenexperiment': there are two wires next to each other. A current going through one wire will effectively double the force, current going through both wires in the same direction will _quadruple_ the force - so force is proportional to the velocity of a moving charge and the force is perependicular to the direction of velocity. $$\textbf{cross product!}$$.

There also exists a magnetohydrodynamic approximation (MHD) which describes how electrons move, considering Ohm's law, and a rephrasing of one of Maxwell's equations:

$$ \frac{\partial \textbf{H}}{\partial t} = \nabla \;\text{x} (\textbf{v}\; \text{x} \;\textbf{H}) + \frac{1}{\mu_0 \sigma} \nabla^2 \textbf{H} $$

which contains an advection (flow) and diffusive term. Basically it shows the temporal change of the magnetic field is due to new material flowing in $$\to$$ inducing a new field + the varying field when it decays due to Ohmic decay.

## Pigeon Magnetoreception: The Governing Phenomena
Pigeons use those magnetic fields to perceive direction, altitude, or location. There are two research backed theories, though the concrete answer is still a mystery.
#### Theory 1: Specialized Cells
In 2012, [Baylor College of Medicine](https://phys.org/news/2012-04-pigeons.html) took seven pigeons, placed them in an unlit room with the Earths magnetic field canceled out and devised a 3-D coil infrastructure to be able to manipulate the field in the room. While doing so, they  were tracking the neural activity of the pigeons. As the magnetic field strength was adjusted to compensate for altitude, they observed single cells within the pigeons' brainstems which identified and encoded information on the magnetic field vector direction, intensity, and polarity. This creates a working model in the pigeon brain that can basically simulate the world based on the relative magnetic field strength & heading at that point. They found 329 neurons in the brain out of which 53 susceptible to the most sensitive changes in the artificial magnetic field. These special neurons give the pigeons their ability to determine not only their position but the direction of travel necessary. Which exact cells determine this ability is yet to be studied in depth, but reverse engineering the mechanism through simulating and playing around with the variables is the first step.
#### Theory 2: Dynamo's In Their Ears
Simply put, this study found ion channels in their inner ears that could detect magnetic fields via induced electric fields. This study, published in _Current Biology_, titled [A Putative Mechanism for Magnetoreception by Electromagnetic Induction in the Pigeon Inner Ear](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0960982219312394) has interesting information regarding this mechanism. They propose that magnetic stimuli activate neurons in a specialized area $$\to$$ which induces a voltage $$\to$$ electroreceptive molecules are expressed $$\to$$ and the resulting electromagnetic induction leads to the sensing; process taking place in their inner ear.
{% include elements/figure.html image="https://ars.els-cdn.com/content/image/1-s2.0-S0960982219312394-fx1.jpg" caption="Graphic Abstract of Proposed Mechanism" %}
Essentially, the animal will detect magnetic fields via electromagnetic induction within the canals of their inner ear. This is astonishing, the physiology of the animal has evolved to such a level where it's harnessing the ever-emanating omnipresent field permeating throughout space-time.

The experimental findings showed that the pigeons endolymph, exposed to a rotating magnetic stimuli, induced a voltage when the magnetic field vector was perpendicular to the plane of the endolymph, and lowest when the vector was parallel to the plane.

150 $$\mu$$T field strength was enough to induce an electric field within the window of detection in the inner ear canal of a pigeon. The research found apically located voltage-gated calcium channels at the base of the hair follicles in the inner ear canal.

It could be possible that a chemical based sensory system is present, however there has been no research to definitively ascertain that to be the case.
